this is a group of men who have grown
rich through secretive energy deals
between Egypt and Israel they have cost
the Egyptian people billions of dollars
in lost revenues so is obvious that
Egypt was being ripped off one of the
men responsible was a confidant of
ex-president Hosni Mubarak did you steal
your country's natural resources all the
other a former Israeli intelligence
officer who is now suing the Egyptian
state how much money will you be
satisfied to take from the Egyptians
I'll settle for fifty billion have a
good day we investigate the role of
energy in the most important
relationship in the Middle East
Israel's peace accord with Egypt as a
new balance of power emerges in the
region from the Israeli perspective it's
a game changer because the one great
weakness was their energy dependent on
others Israel has laid claim to some of
the largest gas fields discovered this
century when gas came warm stream they
called that their second Liberation Day
as gas shortages sweep Egypt president
Abdel Fattah el-sissi is hoping that a
clandestine deal to buy gas from Israel
will secure his political future Egypt
needs gas we can sell it what else can
be better
since its foundation Israel's lack of
oil and gas has been a key strategic
weakness
in the 1960s it looked to neighboring
Egypt Egypt has been extracting gas from
the waters off its coast since the 1960s
during the 1967 arab-israeli war Israel
seized the Sinai Peninsula at a number
of oil fields there this set the stage
for this relationship of energy
interdependence in the 1970s up to
two-thirds of Israel's oil came from
land it illegally occupied as the United
States began brokering talks that would
lead to the Camp David Accords the State
Department made a secret offer to
appease Israel the u.s. agreed to supply
Israel with oil for five years if its
own supplies are disrupted and it cannot
meet its normal requirements
it was always a factor in the
relationship between Egypt and Israel
the Sinai was and still is a producer
and when you got the first Camp David
part of the issue was how to set that at
work will the Egyptians get the oil from
the Sinai when the Camp David Accords
were signed in 1978 Israel agreed to a
full withdrawal from the Sinai Peninsula
the United States formally committed
itself to guarantee Israel with energy
for a further 15 years the u.s.
basically bought and paid significant
sums to try to reassure both parties in
that agreement that we would be there to
keep things in a stable secure situation
but there was a further agreement at
Camp David that was rarely discussed
Egypt committed itself to supplying oil
to Israel those Accords guaranteed
Israel the right to bid on oil supplies
from the Sinai Peninsula Israel had
become dependent on oil imports from
that area so as part of this agreement
they wanted to ensure that they
continued to meet their energy needs
using those oil fields these are common
interests that are not particularly
advertised but they do tend to cement a
relationship when you look at a
relationship or a treaty what you're
looking at is a is a weave of interest
that's what sustains it if you have an
agreement to have an oil condominium
that's helpful
that's what try and put in place and
then it's much harder to tear apart the
Peace Accords also wove together the
interest of two powerful groups
Egypt's military and intelligence
services began regular meetings with
their Israeli counterparts this was to
have profound effects on Egypt's future
from the 1990s onwards the relationship
between the Egyptian military and Israel
was actually of almost an alliance of
close cooperation in terms of
intelligence sharing the deal did bring
certain Israelis from the intelligence
services and Egyptians from the
intelligence services close together the
peace dividend that we've seen is that
members have two business elite
specifically the corrupt business elite
and members of the intelligence agencies
they built lots of close relationships
the military in Egypt are our partners
in collaboration in this region the army
the government see us as legit which is
very important and we should encourage
this in 1993 another historic deal was
again to entangle energy policy with
proposals for Middle East peace in the
Oslo Accords the Palestine Liberation
Organization recognized the State of
Israel Egypt was repaid for its role in
convincing the Palestinian leadership to
sign the deal Edward Walker was the US
ambassador to Egypt and then Israel in
the 1990s we're looking for the gas and
the use of gas as a mechanism for tying
these countries together whatever you
have mutual interests between even two
enemies and they agree on how to deal
with it so they both profit that's
perfect that's exactly what you want
because people they like money and money
talks what followed next was Israeli
investment in a 1.2 billion dollar
petroleum refinery in Alexandria
established in 1994 the Middle East oil
refinery or Mead or brought together
individuals from Egyptian and Israeli
intelligence
together they masterminded a scheme to
ensure the project bypassed popular
opposition in Egypt it made them very
wealthy and it was backed by both
governments and the United States I got
to know the middle people as they were
trying to get their permissions who go
forward with their project there was
always some kind of particular concern
about status of the project because it
gave recognition to Israel in a way that
many people in Egypt were not
comfortable with in other words he gave
them control over a portion of the
economy when you have that kind of
cooperation but that was overcome that
one company was run by two men who both
had very close connections to the
intelligence services and to ruling
regimes who were managing to extort a
vast amount of wealth basically from the
Egyptian public and that money was
clearly circulating back through the
elites it always boils down to is it
enough of an income earner to be able to
cover everybody and I think the answer
is yes now that's why I got started was
able to overcome ins political problems
in the first part
the chief architect of egypt's energy
deals with israel is Hussein Salim he's
a former intelligence officer once
convicted of fraud in the United States
he was the hidden facilitator behind the
Mubarak regime walking with his minder
now living in exile in Spain Salim
continues to wield influence over
Egypt's energy policies I still coming
my way turning left
well since on him for me is the is the
mysterious guy the shadowy figure and
obviously he was very influential he'd
built up relationships with Israelis
Andrew Israeli intelligence in the 70s
and 80s he was based in the US when the
negotiations over the peace deal with
the Israelis were taking place well he
sees a engaging guy and very wealthy he
could he could make things happen and so
I liked him because as a Wester I want
somebody to make things happen while
Hussein Salim was the brains behind the
meat or refinery project the company's
boss was Salam's protege an engineer
named Sammy fought me both men would
become central protagonists in the
hidden story of Egypt's energy industry
fuck me and the Israelis got on
notoriously well Sabbath Army is an
Egyptian gentleman undoubtable there was
strict very knowledgeable excellent
English very polite straightforward I
had good meetings with him
Salim soon cashed out of the meet or
project making a bounty for profit he
arranged for his protege sami famiiy to
become egypt's petroleum minister the
presence of some FM has ministered
defines a new era of the energy sector
in egypt where the energy resources is
managed by the intelligence of egypt in
a confidential document obtained by Al
Jazeera the Egyptian government's
investment authority promised to grant
an exclusive license to sell egypt's gas
to a new company setup by Salim called
EMG or east Mediterranean gas semi-fat
me was the petroleum minister at the
time
Salim now had his sights on a bigger and
more controversial economic prize the
building of an undersea pipeline between
ilish and ash Cologne with a single
objective to pump cheap Egyptian gas
into Israel that was when the basic
principle was established that Egypt
would sell the gas to EMG EMG would sell
the gas on to the Israelis this
agreement didn't take the approval of
the Parliament at that time and instead
they have allocated the gas directly to
a company that has been established by
the Husein Selim and his former
intelligence people as well like him
partnering Salim and his newly formed
company was Yossi Mayman a former agent
from Israel's Foreign Intelligence
Service Mossad Mayman had earlier made
millions as Salam's partner on the meet
or project in 2004 Mayman described
himself to Israel's Energy Minister as
the sole broker for selling egypt's gas
I never liked him for the first time I
saw him and with all due respect a
person that comes to you with a note
which he didn't show by the way saying
that he has a note that gives him the
exclusive right to be the broker of gas
between Egypt and Israel I would raise
an eyebrow and and and that's what I did
Mayman then hired Shabtai Chevy a former
director of Mossad to become a senior
executive with EMG I understood the
chapter Chevette was hired by Mayman in
order to promote or to enhance the deal
why him former Mossad chief beats me I
don't know
Hussein Salomon Mayman between the two
of them had these links and networks had
extended through the intelligence
services and the business community
which enabled him to ensure buy-in from
the Keeley's from the people who needed
to sign off on these deals to help both
governments in Israel and Egypt wanted
to keep the true identity and role of
east Mediterranean gas hidden from view
it wasn't unclear to us
who we were making the deal with what
are the real numbers what what's the
profit what are the costs of of this
deal
it was so culvert it was so behind the
scenes it was so untransparent that it
called for it and despite the opposition
of Israel's then Energy Minister the
deal went ahead with the blessing of
Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak and
Israel's Prime Minister Ariel Sharon
semi-fat me the Egyptian minister of
petroleum signed a memorandum of
understanding with his Israeli
counterpart the memo emphasized that the
supply of gas from Egypt to Israel will
contribute to enhancing peace and
stability in the Middle East
it allowed EMG to construct a pipeline
to supply Israel with gas for at least
15 years it is the kind of agreement
that was helping to cement the Egypt
Israel treaty and that's why we were
always very positive about it without
getting into the whole corruption side
of it when he looked closer at the deal
Prince Key found that Israel benefited
with very cheap gas the deal that they
offered was too good to be true too good
to be true
the prices were ridiculous I don't know
what it was but it was too good to be
true the agreement included secret terms
set out in the Egyptian government
document from 2000 the price of Egyptian
gas sold the AMG was fixed at a dollar
50 for each million British thermal unit
or MBTU
these fire sale prices remain
unprecedented in the natural gas
industry in the same year gas was being
exported in other countries to Japan for
12 and a half dollars not one and a half
dollars 12 and a half dollars in the
same year Germany was receiving piped
gas from Russia for over eight eight
nine ten dollars per unit so this is
vastly more up to eight times more what
the Egyptians were receiving the end
consumer was the Israeli Electric
Company the country's primary power
supplier and at that time it was
Egyptian gas keeping the lights on in
Israel's largest city tel aviv egypt
would sell to this company with less
than $2 per million
you wear Egypt at that time were
importing fuel oil to run the
electricity power stations with around
nine to ten dollars per million Btu
after first year the Israelis finally
consented okay they will pay more but
the Egyptians were still only getting
three dollars the fact that the
Egyptians were now receiving three
rather than one and a half then they
were still being ripped off and still
vastly under pricing for gas and in fact
the Egyptians lost more money in 2010 at
that higher price than they did in 2008
at the lower price because they were
also exporting more gas even now the
price that Israel paid for egypt's gas
is so sensitive that officials at the
electric company remain unwilling to
discuss it they deal with Egypt was very
important for Israel Electric and for
the State of Israel what was the price
of the gas that Israel was buying from
Egypt in the quantity the King
sorry
can't talk about the terms of this the
only thing that I would tell a is not a
price I'm not in a position to what the
number the Egyptian state was selling
the gas to EMG dominated by two men who
say in Salem and your semen they were
receiving it from the Egyptians for
three dollars and then selling it on to
the Israelis for four and a half and
basically pocketing the difference we
tracked down Yossi Mayman as he arrived
at his corporate headquarters north of
Tel Aviv the gated compound was once the
center of a business empire worth
billions he rarely speaks in public and
refused our earlier requests for an
interview there's been a lot of money
you've made off of this sale of gas
below market price from Egypt so you say
what was the price that you paid for
Egypt's gas or the matter with you for
Egypt do you think it was fair yeah why
don't you disclose the price yet any
people feel that the gas was sold at
prices that weren't fair and that the
government ripped off the people do you
have any message to the Egyptian people
did you sell for a fair price as many
people think is very dangerous to swim
in Australia because of both jellyfish
and sharks with raspberry jelly fish I'm
no shark mr. Magadan was last time you
talked with Hussein Salim CEO
what's racine salim like in person next
question I don't want anything from this
you know this point of view that we
before also about the Egyptian nothing
from our space the EMG deal relied on
Israeli political support as well as one
more crucial link sounds relationship
with Mubarak BMG had nothing but the
political support of the Mubarak regime
dmg had no assets before it sold even in
one molecule of gas it was already
estimated at over two billion dollars
when you've gotten a repressive
undemocratic regime that's trying to
siphon off as much money as it can then
you need to find ways to do that and
that is largely to roll dmg played and
nobody's telling stories out of school
to say that people who had that kind of
position with Mubarak did very well
financially one of the problems they had
ultimately we tracked Hussein Salim to
one of the seven mansions he owns in
Spain a lot of a clayton's fishermen
cannot al Jazeera ah how are you we'd uh
we'd like to ask you some questions
Salim was convicted in absentia of
corruption and squandering Egypt's
resources police confiscated assets
worth millions of euros from his
properties in Spain but he avoided
extradition to Egypt okay what's your
relation to former Mossad officer you'll
see my mom was your baton boy
let's be respectful about this Gordon
case I don't want interview no no I want
to be respectful about this mr. Salloum
do you feel that you're above the law
that you don't owe the Egyptian people
an explanation
I don't on why don't you want to answer
don't you don't answer to journalists or
you don't answer to the courts you don't
think that you have a moral obligation
to speak to your people
what do the Egyptian people have a right
to know what you did with the country's
natural gas you think that's funny the
Egyptian people are without power mr.
Salim and you live quite quite well here
in Madrid
you don't feel that you owe an
explanation to the Egyptian people about
what happened I would not utter mica
Mineo Paulo alo analyzes energy prices
for a london-based think tank
he has worked out how much the EMG deal
has cost the Egyptian people using
prices from the same confidential
documents obtained by al-jazeera he made
a calculation based on each year the
pipeline was operating in 2008 when the
gas first started being pumped the
Israelis and EMG were paying the
Egyptians one and a half dollars per
unit and this meant that in 2008 the
Egyptians took in under 100 million
dollars for the gas tax went through
that pipeline now at that same point in
time the Japanese were paying over $12
12.6 dollars per unit of gas Egypt could
have exported gas they instead and
instead of taking in less than 100
million dollars it could have taken in
770 million dollars mica then worked out
how much in total Egyptian taxpayers had
subsidised Israeli consumers over the
three years that the pipeline was
operating my calculations show that
Egypt lost
1.8 billion through this deal Egypt
could have made 1.8 billion more dollars
by using the gas in other ways
mica also calculated the total revenue
that the Egyptian people have lost from
deals its government made via Hussein
Salim and is Israeli associates this
includes contracts exporting gas to
other countries as well as Israel that
adds up to a total loss to the Egyptian
people of possibly over 11 billion
dollars almost all of these involved to
say in salem at some point in time in
arranging the deals what do you have to
say to your people do you feel ashamed
that you've been convicted of stealing
the country's natural resources I'm not
either are you guilty of those crimes no
anger no that's not a yes or no you said
anthem you're not saying you're guilty
or not on them finally mica estimated
the personal wealth that Hussein Salim
made from the EMG deal even before any
gas was sold he had turned a 300 million
dollar investment into a windfall during
the same period that the pipeline was
built he sold 37 percent of his holding
sold the one chunk for 2 billion and the
other trunk for 2.2 billion since 4.2
billion that Husein salem made before
the gas had really even started pumping
he'd made in an investment of 300
million and taken in 4.2 billion
did you steal your country's natural
resources all no in part - ow
EMG shareholders now hope to reverse the
pumps on their pipeline and sell Israeli
gas to Egypt you steal your country's
natural resources
in part one al-jazeera's investigative
unit examined how a former intelligence
officer made billions of dollars from
corrupt energy deals approved by the
egyptian state now we reveal how the
legacy of corruption has so damaged
Egypt's energy sector that it stands to
become dependent on Israel Egypt
mismanaged its gas industry it raises
the possibility that Israel in
contradiction to the history of the
energy relations will be supplying Egypt
these are the men who have devastated
Egypt's energy industry their story is
closely linked to the most important
relationship in the Middle East
Egypt's peace accord with Israel it is a
story that has now come full circle
the former field marshal Abdel Fattah
el-sissi won a largely ceremonial
presidential poll the elected leader
that sissie overthrew in a military coup
Mohamed Morsi remains in jail
cissie's victory has quashed the Arab
Spring while protecting the peace
accords with Israel
I think now with the return off CC and
the return of order I think we see now
the spring we really do he's attractive
because he's not more see and the
concern has always been to maintain and
sustain the relationship between Egypt
and Israel when the Arab Spring swept
Egypt a major motivator largely ignored
by the West was the unleashing of anger
against the government's policies
towards Israel especially the energy
deals involving Salim and Mayman one of
the reasons I think for the revolution
of 2011 the issue of selling the
Egyptian gas at low prices to to Israel
it was one of the issues that were
highlighted all over Times Square and
many felt the trail almost any Egyptian
that I mentioned my work too says why do
we export the gas that Israelis give
them what they are doing to Palestinians
and why do we export it to them in 2009
during Operation Cast Lead the
electricity depowered that invasion was
in large part supplied by Egypt
subsidized Egyptian fuel was
underwriting the Israeli attack on Gaza
now when Egyptians realize out there
like what
Mubarak was ousted by a wide coalition
of demonstrators with the acquiescence
of Egypt's military itself threatened by
the Mubarak regime scre up ssin as the
Armed Forces assumed temporary control
EMG was still using the pipeline to send
gas to Israel
even though Salim its founder had fled
Hussein Salim cleverly enough had
absconded
we've been days of the 2011 revolution
starting and run off with a load of
money in his bags anger at the EMG deal
prompted frequent attacks on the
pipeline carrying the gas to Israel more
than a dozen bombings brought the flow
to a halt in April 2012 the Egyptian
army intervened the military was trying
to kind of send a sort of Olive Branch
to the revolutionaries by at least
temporarily halting those gas sales and
cancelling that that contract but the
decision to close the pipeline would
have far-reaching consequences Israel
had insisted the EMG contract contained
a clause obligating Egypt to provide a
continuous and uninterrupted supply of
gas for 15 years that promise allowed
the EMG directors to protect their own
profits so by abruptly breaching a
contract the military set off the legal
equivalent of a ticking bomb the supply
contract underlying gas exports included
specific references that if the
investments of the mg and the
profit-making possibilities of EMG were
threatened then EMG would be able to go
to the International Chamber of Commerce
and to use the International Court of
Arbitration to seek compensation shortly
after the pipeline was shut
Yossi Mayman launched a barrage of legal
proceedings against the Egyptian
government at various international
courts with allegations of corruption
surrounding salim Mayman is now steering
the legal action on behalf of EMG
shareholders these arbitration forms
tend to serve the interests of multi
national corporations when you go to
International Court of Arbitration
companies almost always win which means
that if you job losers which is highly
likely then Egypt's resources can
basically be confiscated in other
countries
EMG can say well we want that we'll take
this that's where 500 million we'll take
that that's worth a billion we'll take
that that's worth a billion EMG has
filed four separate actions in
arbitration courts including the World
Bank these cases are pending and the
sums involved are so huge that in theory
they could bankrupt the Egyptian state
what they've asked for is 8 billion
dollars Hussein Salim has already walked
away with four billion dollars and now
the investing companies want
compensation for another 8 billion
dollars because that's what they say
they would have made in profit in the
next years Egypt's treasury has around
14 billion dollars of foreign reserves 8
billion dollars that's more in half of
each of total foreign reserves that it's
currently using to just about keep
taking over and all of this is because
of a corrupt deal that was signed to
basically support two dodgy businessman
and Israeli one an Egyptian one to save
our public wealth and distribute amongst
certainly lead characters
but we tried to get in I asked your C
Damon to explain AMG's intentions we
want to ask you have massive cases
against the Egyptian government how much
money 8 million dollars is at stake how
much money will you be satisfied to take
from the Egyptians I'll settle for fifty
billion have a good day by the summer of
Egypt's energy sector is in a full-blown
crisis years of corruption have
destroyed its relations with global
energy companies the Egyptian government
admits that it owes the foreign
companies as much as six billion US
dollars so this is not very enticing for
foreign investors so it has big
difficulties in attracting foreign
capital and the problems don't end there
in addition to EMGs lawsuit there is
another six billion dollar claim levied
against Egypt this time by the Spanish
energy giant Union phone osa it claims
Egypt has been unable to supply the
necessary gas to continue running its
plants on the egyptian coast so just
from the known debts in legal cases that
means the egyptian state is facing
liabilities of a staggering twenty
billion dollars
while decades of crooked deals had
undermined Egypt's energy sector a
presidential candidate was emerging who
pledged to clean up the industry in the
shadow of the military the Muslim
Brotherhood candidate Mohamed Morsi won
the country's first free election back
in Washington policymakers began to
reconsider their promotion of democracy
in the Middle East western-style
democracy as we see it as essential
doesn't really quite fit the mold over
there there's a veneer of people within
the region who've been educated in the
West which accept the velas values but
the overwhelming part of society does
not the Muslim Brotherhood is pretty
solid reputation for not being highly
sympathetic to the West and particularly
not to the United States so what's not
really in our interest to see them
succeed an Islamic leaning government
also sounded the alarm in Tel Aviv what
do they have to do with democracy God
knows and this almost stupidity to bring
Western values into a country which is
fully Islamic many of which are poor
fundamental Islam's is ridiculous
the way the new situation in Egypt was
analyzed in Israel was there are two
sources of power there is the government
mercy which is unfriendly to the Israeli
interests and there was the there was
the military establishment which was
seen as a possible partner morsi's
attempt to confront the rampant
corruption in the energy sector
coincided with the trial of the former
minister of petroleum semi-fat me along
with EMG founder hussein salim who was
in exile in spain each was sentenced to
15 years for their roles in selling
natural gas to israel at below market
rates in terms of fighting energy
corruption that was about as far as it
would go
assisting the president was hot amazon
he was not from the Muslim Brotherhood
but brought with him decades of
experience in the oil and gas industry
president Morsi was facing a lot of
pressure with all this network of
corruption that exists in the
intelligence in the military
this energy corruption network was one
of the strongest reasons why the leaders
the army generals decided to make the
coup over mercy the energy sector was
also to play a central role in staging
the coup suddenly there were shortages
we saw massive lines and petrol stations
throughout the country we also saw
electricity cuts and shortages the
propaganda machine was that was
basically saying that most he is behind
all this he is behind the gaskets is his
election was bad luck and see what's
happening to the energy only later would
clear evidence emerge of the military's
deliberate actions to spark public
unrest the Egyptian military used the
supply of gasoline and the gas station
at the weapon to throw off Morsi one day
after the cool all these cues have
disappeared and everything goes back to
normal
voila you know you see the all these
local TV stations saying it's seeing all
the brilliance of a CCE has resolved
this in no time and so on
after the army ousted more seen much of
the world viewed events in Egypt with
horror the military then led by general
sisy had overthrown a democratically
elected president and crushed the party
that he belonged to you had the worst
massacre in Egypt's modern history
happening under CC when you killed more
than a thousand people in Destin 7 hours
the United States was critical of the
bloodshed but stopped short of
withdrawing support for the regime they
were very careful not to say it was a
coup so and if you look back at the
statements its own sort of used every
euphemism they could accept coup so it
was not a coupe let's get that straight
this isn't just having elections that's
wonderful but what comes after the
election if there's not a framework for
making government work to accomplish
things and it's just it's very hollow
the lack of real democracy has allowed
the Egyptian military's partnership with
Israel to prosper without any public
accountability that includes the nature
of president sissies contacts with Tel
Aviv it was very clear close
coordination between the Egyptian
military led by Sisi and Israeli
officials at the highest levels in order
to ensure a rapid transition to the kind
of resumption of a military government
in Cairo the relationship is going well
it's technically a sound to cooperating
on the military side so it's sort of
back to normal if that would be called
normal but one important factor has
changed after years of plentiful gas
Egypt is now in the throes of genuine
gas shortages
Egypt's desperate there's queues outside
petrol stations almost every night
there's a blackout you never know when
it's going to be the economy is
struggling people is struggling people
are furious what's happening now in 2014
is happening for real there's not
fabricated anymore that Egypt is really
suffering now a dramatic shortage of
energy resources meanwhile a staggering
fight has been made in the Mediterranean
in 2010 Israel laid claim to deepwater
fields that hold up to 26 trillion cubic
feet of natural gas called Leviathan and
tomorrow these huge discoveries are the
largest of their kind this century if
you talk to the Israelis now they're
self called Russia leave each other and
when gas came on stream they call that
their second liberation day and once
Leviathan comes a stream with the
possibility of exporting gas fidgets the
implications for you for Israel would be
tremendous suddenly right next door the
Israeli state has more gas than it needs
suddenly Israeli state is saying yeah
we've got some gas you want to buy it
you have to pay a lot more than what we
paid you right now Egypt needs gas we
are in the close proximity of the
technical point of view it will take
very short time to have a flow of
natural gas to Egypt
after the coup sissy began to arrange
the deal that could secure his political
future the regime made secret approaches
to Tel Aviv since the overthrow of
Mohamed Morsi contacts have resumed
between the two governments there have
been several meetings mainly from the
Egyptian side the Egyptians are very
interested very curious to know how much
the Israeli government would stand up to
such deal ensure the flow of gas the
company that has been operating the
rig's
and leading Israel's exploration in the
Mediterranean is the texas-based noble
energy they refused our request for an
interview and would not discuss gas
sales to Egypt we also track down
Egypt's top diplomat in Israel
Mustafa Cooney but he too refused to
meet with us
Israelis tell us that Egypt is keeping
its approaches clandestine because the
regime in Cairo needs to buy time
what they want to to do is establish
themselves from the domestic point of
view again political support and then go
into economic ventures with Israel in
January 2014
sissie put the first part of his plan in
place the Reuters news agency noted that
the Egyptian government had quietly
lifted restrictions on private oil and
gas companies operating in Egypt for the
first time in the country's history
companies can now import gas from any
foreign energy provider four months
later Noble Energy announced a letter of
intent with the Spanish firm Union phone
osa to supply natural gas from offshore
Israel to its gas liquefaction
facilities in Egypt Noble Energy have
examined the notion of selling the gas
to Egypt it can either be used
domestically in Egypt or it can go to
the LNG plants on the Nile Delta one of
which is closed down because of lack of
gas and the other which is running at
only partial capacity the two liquefied
natural gas or LNG plants on egypt's
coast at Eid KU & Damietta are key to
egypt's proposed deal with Israel
one is run by the spanish union phone
osa which is also suing egypt for six
billion dollars lng is a method of
freezing gas until it becomes a liquid
it can then be transported by tanker
rather than pipeline and sold in far
greater volume the plants already built
they were built at time one cost of
building a ledger plant was low and
they're not functioning at the moment
because the result enough gas for
exports initiative today nearly all of
egypt's gas is being diverted for
domestic use due to the severe shortages
in doing so the government has breached
export obligations too powerful energy
companies each of the two companies
which each run the LNG facilities lose
revenues in billions of US dollars just
by not being able to to export the gas
that they have committed themselves to
to export according to the contracts
that they have Egyptians are interested
in enabling Israeli gas to go from the
natural gas fields offshore Israel
straight to the LNG facilities in Egypt
Israel has made it clear that any
commercial deal with Egypt needed more
than just access to Egypt's LNG plants
it also wanted a commitment that the
Suez Canal would always be accessible to
ships carrying its gas to Israel's most
lucrative markets in Asia the changing
government in Egypt has meant that
Israel can reconsider the option of
converting some of its gas into LNG in
the Mediterranean and then shipping that
gas via tanker through the Suez Canal to
destinations in Asia under the Morsi
government there was no confidence that
Egypt would allow such shipments to go
through the Suez Canal the changing
government has meant that this potential
can be re-examined if we can get into an
agreement with Egypt between the
companies but supplying gas to Egypt
this will also cement the relations
political and economic between Israel
and Egypt the Israelis would love to
make Egypt dependent on them that would
fit them perfectly power wise and that
also offers a revenue creating mechanism
for the Israeli state and possibly again
from a man and Hossein Salim
one option for delivering Israeli gas to
Egypt's LNG plants is to lay new
pipelines from Israel's gas fields but
the quickest and cheapest method is to
reverse the pumps on the EMG pipeline
from Israel's gas terminal at Ashkelon
and then deliver it overland we've
already got a pipeline running from
Egypt to the Israeli state from of East
Ashkelon you could reverse that quite
simple won't even cost very much money
and send the gas the other way the
Israelis could put the gas in and it
could come out in a leash and be
distributed tea into the Egyptian
Network we discovered a clue to the deal
EMG is hoping to make with the Egyptian
government it's buried in a bankruptcy
filing from yo Siemens Holding Company
in the United States a footnote reveals
that shareholders are considering using
EMGs pipeline to transport natural gas
from Israel to Egypt so that it can be
converted into LNG or use locally in
Egypt and EMG holds a powerful
bargaining chip an eight billion dollar
lawsuit against the Egyptian government
why you're suing the government of Egypt
and if you're using economic duress to
have them by Israeli gas is that the
case thank you very much gentlemen have
a good day are you working with the
Israeli government to reverse the
directional flow of the EMG pipeline so
that Israeli gas can be soldiers I
appreciate your insistence again while
evasive Mayman appeared reassured are
you working with the Israeli government
thank you
are you working with the Egyptian
government
the Egyptian government has various ways
out now they could just stand up and say
enough
we've been ripped off enough the
Egyptian people don't deserve to pay out
anymore but facing pressure facing cool
cases in legal spaces where they have
almost no control they're going to look
for an option that doesn't involve just
standing up to outside power that seems
like more of a compromise a compromise
that let's all say in Salem and Mayman
keep making a lot of money in Cairo the
former oil Minister semi-fat me was
released from custody pending a retrial
which is yet to happen Husain Salim is
expected to return to Egypt with the
charges against him dropped the hidden
story of Egypt's energy industry is back
on track they didn't lose everything
when Morsi came on board the military
sustained its relation we still had
people we were talking to the Israelis
had the people they were talking to it's
all going on while Morsi was in power he
hadn't been there long enough to really
change the structure that much so you
had the same people or their
replacements in place without the same
basic interests involved how would not I
think will you answer to the judges yes
I would
when are you going to answer to the
judges Windy corner we'd be happy to
come in and have an interview if you
divide us yeah
are we welcome
any message to the Egyptian people
Israel will we be the only one that will
end up stronger out of this and all the
other people around will end up much
more weaker it's basically saying to the
Israelis that you want to earth here's a
tool you can use to screw us if you want
to turn off our gas because you want to
put pressure on us here
King do it if you want to stop our
economy here's a tool to do it the
Egyptian public can make a calculation
that it's happier to have electricity 24
hours a day because they deal with
Israel and getting natural gas or they
would prefer to be in the dark for some
hours a day as a matter of principle
you